# Data Lake with Apache Spark
A music streaming startup, Sparkify, has grown their user base and song database even more and want to move their data warehouse to a data lake. Their data resides in S3, in a directory of JSON logs on user activity on the app, as well as a directory with JSON metadata on the songs in their app.

As their data engineer, I are tasked with building an ETL pipeline that extracts their data from S3, processes them using Spark, and loads the data back into S3 as a set of dimensional tables. This will allow their analytics team to continue finding insights in what songs their users are listening to.

We'll be able to test the database and ETL pipeline by running queries given to us by the analytics team from Sparkify and compare the results with their expected results.

## Project Description
In this project, we will work with Spark and data lakes to build an ETL pipeline for a data lake hosted on S3. We will need to load data from S3, process the data into analytics tables using Spark, and load them back into S3. We'll deploy this Spark process on a cluster using AWS.

## Project Structure
The project includes the following files and folders:

```
├── README.md
├── dl.cfg
├── etl.py
├── requirements.txt
├── Sparkify.ipynb
└── data
    ├── log-data.zip
    └── song-data.zip
```

- `README.md` - a markdown file giving an overview of the project and explaining the project structure
- `dl.cfg` - stores your AWS credentials
- `etl.py` - reads data from S3, processes that data using Spark, and writes them back to S3. This is build out based on the work in the ETL notebook.
- `Sparkify.ipynb` - reads and processes files from `song_data` and `log_data` and loads the data back into S3. 
- `data` - contains data to test the ETL pipeline

## Project Datasets

### Song Dataset
The first dataset is a subset of real data from the [Million Song Dataset](http://millionsongdataset.com/). Each file is in JSON format and contains metadata about a song and the artist of that song. The files are partitioned by the first three letters of each song's track ID. For example, here are file paths to two files in this dataset.

```
song_data/A/B/C/TRABCEI128F424C983.json
song_data/A/A/B/TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json
```

And below is an example of what a single song file, TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json, looks like.

```
{"num_songs": 1, "artist_id": "ARJIE2Y1187B994AB7", "artist_latitude": null, "artist_longitude": null, "artist_location": "", "artist_name": "Line Renaud", "song_id": "SOUPIRU12A6D4FA1E1", "title": "Der Kleine Dompfaff", "duration": 152.92036, "year": 0}
```

### Log Dataset
The second dataset consists of log files in JSON format generated by this event simulator based on the songs in the dataset above. These simulate activity logs from a music streaming app based on specified configurations.

The log files in the dataset we'll be working with are partitioned by year and month. For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset.

```
log_data/2018/11/2018-11-12-events.json
log_data/2018/11/2018-11-13-events.json
```

And below is an example of what the data snippet in a log file, 2018-11-12-events.json, looks like.

```
{"artist":null,"auth":"Logged In","firstName":"Kevin","gender":"M","itemInSession":0,"lastName":"Arellano","length":null,"level":"free","location":"Harrisburg-Carlisle, PA","method":"GET","page":"Home","registration":1540006905796.0,"sessionId":514,"song":null,"status":200,"ts":1542069417796,"userAgent":"\"Mozilla\/5.0 (Macintosh; Intel Mac OS X 10_9_4) AppleWebKit\/537.36 (KHTML, like Gecko) Chrome\/36.0.1985.125 Safari\/537.36\"","userId":"66"}
{"artist":"Fu","auth":"Logged In","firstName":"Kevin","gender":"M","itemInSession":1,"lastName":"Arellano","length":280.05832,"level":"free","location":"Harrisburg-Carlisle, PA","method":"PUT","page":"NextSong","registration":1540006905796.0,"sessionId":514,"song":"Ja I Ty","status":200,"ts":1542069637796,"userAgent":"\"Mozilla\/5.0 (Macintosh; Intel Mac OS X 10_9_4) AppleWebKit\/537.36 (KHTML, like Gecko) Chrome\/36.0.1985.125 Safari\/537.36\"","userId":"66"}
{"artist":null,"auth":"Logged In","firstName":"Maia","gender":"F","itemInSession":0,"lastName":"Burke","length":null,"level":"free","location":"Houston-The Woodlands-Sugar Land, TX","method":"GET","page":"Home","registration":1540676534796.0,"sessionId":510,"song":null,"status":200,"ts":1542071524796,"userAgent":"\"Mozilla\/5.0 (Windows NT 6.3; WOW64) AppleWebKit\/537.36 (KHTML, like Gecko) Chrome\/36.0.1985.143 Safari\/537.36\"","userId":"51"}
```

## Schema for Song Play Analysis
Using the song and log datasets, you'll need to create a star schema optimized for queries on song play analysis. This includes the following tables.

**Fact Table**
1. **songplays** - records in log data associated with song plays i.e. records with page `NextSong`
   - songplay_id, start_time, user_id, level, song_id, artist_id, session_id, location, user_agent

**Dimension Tables**
2. **users** - users in the app
   - user_id, first_name, last_name, gender, level

3. **songs** - songs in music database
   - song_id, title, artist_id, year, duration

4. **artists** - artists in music database
   - artist_id, name, location, lattitude, longitude

5. **time** - timestamps of records in songplays broken down into specific units
   - start_time, hour, day, week, month, year, weekday

